Brendan Ritchie\
britchie@fas.harvard.edu

*‘Good’ and Evil—draft of*

From value theory to the problem of evil
========================================

Peter Geach argued that ‘good’ is a “logically attributive adjective,”
by which he meant that anything good is good *as* something: a thing
cannot be *simply* good.[^1] Geach’s idea has needed refinement.[^2] My
own way of articulating the idea is that goodness occurs in *functional
contexts:* evaluative language operates against a conception of how
things are supposed to be work or what they are for. I will try to
explain what I mean by this shortly. But my principal interest here is
in how this idea sheds light on the problem of evil. Taking this
approach to value, we might interpret evil in terms of human
dysfunction. Then we should observe that there is a form of dysfunction
which stems from incompletion. Such incompletion, I will argue, does no
discredit to a designer. So if evil is a matter of incompletion—if we
ourselves are imperfect *because* incomplete—then we cannot with justice
suppose our Designer to lack power or any interest in us.

Function and goodness
=====================

In central cases, what we say of something in saying that it is good
depends on what we may refer to as standards internal to it. Take an
artifact such as a knife. A knife is made to cut. A good knife (a knife
that is good *as* a knife) is therefore one well suited to cutting. A
knife can be merely instrumentally good as well—a kitchen knife could do
fine duty as a weapon. Human purposes or desires are not required for
the existence of internal standards. When we talk about the good of
plants and animals we draw on a conception of the proper functioning of
these organisms or their parts.

There are also derivative forms of goodness. There is such a thing as
good complexion, for example, and complexions may or may not themselves
be functional, but good complexion, in the basic case, betrays good
health, and that brings us to a functional context.

Where no functional context exists (or where we see no functional
context), it is unintelligible to speak of goodness. I would not know
what to make of the question whether the number three is good; neither
could I say whether Saturn is good, unless it were specified that we
were after something to colonize, or mine, or investigate
scientifically.

Some cases are difficult, particularly as we turn to moral philosophy.
What makes something a good thing to do, morally speaking? Could there
be standards internal to action? Or is the goodness of a person
conceptually prior to the goodness of action? Or should what is good
*for* people be of primary interest? It is no part of my view that
answers to such questions must always be obvious, though if my view is
assumed, then I believe we ought to approach moral theory along
Aristotelian lines—I would hold, in particular, that a conception of
what it is to be a good person is parasitic on a conception of what a
person *is* or *is for*.[^3]

Start with a suggestion from Michael Thompson’s “The Representation of
Life.”[^4] This is that the possibility of describing a given organism
as having arms rather than, say, deformed wings depends on a conception
of the form of life of which that organism partakes. Nothing else could
settle what that stuff at its sides are. Nothing could settle the
question, for example, in the case of a creature which, resembling a
man, is only a freak amalgamation of unlikely quantum happenings.

Next, our conception of a form of life finds canonical expression in
irreducible, non-statistical generalizations which Thompson calls
“Aristotelian categoricals.” An example is “cats have four legs.” This
is true although not all cats have four legs, and could be true even if
by a series of traumatic events most cats had some other number of legs.
For Thompson, these generalities constitute the primitive form of our
understanding of life. And they further constitute the standards of
evaluation for organisms: if cats have four legs and this cat has only
three, then it is defective.

This will not quite do—Thompson’s account makes no room, for example,
for the possibility that in failing to satisfy some generality, an
individual might be not defective but exceptional. Neither will
attention to the grammatical form of the Aristotelian categorical
distinguish characterizations of human life as such from
characterizations of a given form of social life. Philippa Foot offers
“humans establish rules of conduct and recognize rights” as an
Aristotelian categorical, but why shouldn’t the following serve just as
well: “when rations are meagre, the Karamojong give the available food
to their girls, who can be traded for cattle [thereby leaving the boys
to starve]”?[^5] I think we should agree that what constitutes an
organism’s thriving depends on what it *is,* but we should locate the
relevant descriptions within an historical context; we should draw them
from a conception of how an organism is *designed* to operate. We could
try to understand this in evolutionary terms, but in the present context
we may appeal to a conception of what it is that God made us for—of how
he intended for us to live. What it is to *be* a human, then, is a
question about what a human is *for,* and that determines what it is to
succeed as a human. A good life, in turn, is a life in accord with the
virtues which allow for such success, and supplied with the materials
for their exercise.[^6]

This has been a very brief summary of the value theory I favour, without
any serious attempt at argument.[^7] Its distance from familiar
metaethical theories will be plain; it holds, for example, that the
infamous open-question argument merely trades on a confusion about what
sort of property goodness is. I do hope the approach might be reasonably
amenable to Christians in particular. Perhaps there is no great
consensus on metaethical matters among Christian philosophers, but many
of them have found it natural to work within an Aristotelian framework,
and these ideas should not seem strange to Christians: that humans are
artifacts; that what we are is therefore importantly a matter of our
history, which has been partially revealed to us; that we cannot live
well apart from God’s plans.

The nature of evil
==================

Rocks make bad cushions, my father takes a perverse delight in awful
puns, Budweiser is a bad beer, un-oiled motorcycles run poorly. The
world is full of these and other sorts of badness, but they are not
problems *with* the world, and no one could think to wonder how God
could allow them. But the presence of *evil* might be a problem with the
world that we could lay at God’s feet. How is evil to be understood in
terms of the present theory, and will evil so understood pose a
challenge to belief in a benevolent and almighty God?

I suppose that evil is badness in certain spheres. In particular, what
is bad for humans, or what manifests harm already done to humans, is
evil. Natural evils, then, are natural events that damage or destroy
lives. Evil thoughts are the thoughts of a damaged person. Evil actions
are actions doing harm or reflecting evil thoughts.

On the understanding of the human good which I elucidated in the
previous section, what I have just said is that evils are things that
prevent us from living out our proper aim, or that reflect our so
failing to live it out. Natural evils obstruct our proper realization.
Evil thoughts are the thoughts of imperfect creatures, insofar as they
are imperfect or corrupt. Evil actions reflect such thoughts, or make
perfection harder or impossible for ourselves or others.

If that is reasonable, then I suggest that the question “why is there
evil” is equivalent to the question “why aren’t we perfect?”[^8]

Imperfection and incompletion
=============================

More than one interesting answer might be offered in response to the
question just posed. The one I want to suggest is the following: we
aren’t perfect because we aren’t finished yet.

What do I mean by saying that we are not finished? Well, John tells us
that what exactly we shall be has not yet been revealed.[^9] If John
doesn’t know what a completed human looks like then I certainly don’t.
But it seems we’re not it (though we’ve been given instruction for
getting there). Paul also tells us as much: he compares us to buildings,
laid on the foundation of Jesus Christ, and expresses confidence that
the One who began that work will bring it to completion; even as our
outer nature wastes away we do not lose heart, because we know our inner
nature is being renewed—that we are transformed into the Lord’s image by
stages.[^10] The Christian view, then, is that we are are extraordinary
artifacts, capable of contributing to (or even thwarting) our own
formation—and this formation is not yet complete. Now the idea I want to
exploit is that it shows no lack of skill or care in a designer that his
creation is not finished all at once; no incompetence on the part of the
sculptor is revealed by the fact that he must chip away at a stone
before it is a polished statue. God neither needs nor lacks time, but
the *time* involved in the creative process is not the point: the thing
to see is that there are two different ways in which an artifact can be
imperfect, holding the imperfection constant.

Suppose I have a tree fort out back. It is not in completely
satisfactory shape, because when it rains water runs through the slats
in the roof. The roof requires a tarpaulin. Now it might be that the
fort once had such a tarpaulin and now lacks it, because I am not very
good at affixing tarpaulins and the wind took it, or because I’ve been
neglecting the fort altogether for some time. However, it might be that
everything is on schedule—I’m just not finished yet. It’s right there on
the calendar. Day five (today): roof slats. Day six: tarpaulin. Day
seven: relax in new tree fort.

There might be any number of reasons I planned to do things over six
days—I’m busy with other things, or anyways I can only work so fast. I
might just be savouring the creative process. What there cannot be here
is any presumption of incompetence or neglect. No one can fairly ask of
me, “what went wrong?” So long as there are no missteps in the process
of construction, an artifact at a given stage just *is* as it’s supposed
to be—that is, it is as it’s supposed to be for now. So some
imperfection indicates incompetence or negligence, in which case
imperfection constitutes shoddiness or decay. And then there is
imperfection which indicates no such thing. And it will not always be
possible to tell which sort we are looking at.

Of course a craftsman might fail to complete a project in the first
place out of incompetence or lack of interest. Likewise, defect could be
introduced quite willfully post-completion, and then need not represent
any kind of authorial *failing.* So, in one sense, the distinction is
ahistorical, and is just a distinction between the defects which find
their origin in sloth, incompetence, neglect, and decay, and the
lackings which reflect deliberate policy. It seems to me also important
however whether or not the artifact in question has ever been complete,
so that the concern is also an historical one. If I keep pulling my fort
apart and reworking it, that looks like tinkering: like I either don’t
know how to finish my project off or don’t much care how it winds up.
Similarly, lack of care will look like the right explanation if I allow
the once-finished fort to disintegrate. This is going to be trouble in
the case of human imperfection. If we were once perfect and are so no
longer, how is this? If the destructive agency was our own, why should
we, having been perfect, have engaged in such self-destruction?[^11] If
the destructive agent is God, he begins to look somewhat capricious.
That, of course, is why I have proposed that we are imperfect because
incomplete.

That is my whole solution. Let me run through it once more. We begin
with a sense that something is wrong with the world. But if things are
according to plan, then nothing is wrong with the world. Now it could be
that nothing is *wrong,* but that the plan still reveals something
unflattering about God. If the so-called plan is just to put things
together and pull them apart again then we are dealing only with a
divine tinkerer. If the plan was just to set everything going and then
let it wind down, we have only the deists’ god. But that is not how
things in fact are: God has manifested concern for us and has shown no
inconstancy of purpose.[^12]

There might seem to be a third worry, though. My tree fort could come
out just as intended, and yet be a pretty cruddy tree fort. I do not set
the standards here: for all that my fort matches my blueprints, I will
have made a poor one if it is carried away by the slightest breeze. So
couldn’t we allow that we are proceeding according to God’s plans, and
still wonder at the wisdom of those plans? Perhaps. Keeping in mind the
present theory of value, there is the difficulty of knowing what
criteria we should be appealing to. We may not simply help ourselves to
such. I suppose that a conception of the goodness of a world must draw
principally on a conception of certain kinds of evil or damage *in* that
world, and this has already been our topic.

And yet there must be *some* criteria for evaluating a world as a whole.
God made the world and saw that it was good, and I at least want to
agree with this. So what does it mean? Mainly, I think, that our world
shows exquisite workmanship.[^13] But perhaps not only that the world
displays great craft but that it is in some further sense
*beautiful*—worth the Artisan’s time. I confess I have no account of
aesthetic value. But I wonder if anyone has a pretty definite feeling
that an omnipotent being should have made something *nicer* than our
world? And even if our complaint were that *we* are shoddily done, this
will be an unfair charge if my hypothesis is correct: I know of no
serious complaint about what we *will* be.

Still it will be natural to worry that the problem of evil has been
pushed back. Why does God create this way? Why not make humans whole and
complete from the start, and skip over the period of imperfection and
suffering? Do I think that the good of self-creation somehow outweighs
the evil that is suffering? That would after all be a familiar sort of
approach to the problem. But I am not saying that. “Why would God create
this way?” may be an interesting question, but it calls for no *excuse,*
because the imperfections in question here are only of the
work-in-progress type. Compare children. God could have created—perhaps
has elsewhere created—intelligent creatures which reproduce by division.
Such creatures would avoid some of our trials and errors. And yet all is
in order when a human being is a child.

Basically the same response can be made to another worry: why would God
allow us to come to completion along paths like the prodigal son’s, or
indeed to refuse or fail to complete ourselves at all? Couldn’t he
orchestrate matters such that we complete ourselves without the errors
and rebellion and regression? Must I here appeal to free will, so
falling back on another standard response to the problem of evil? To be
sure, if we are not free, then perhaps the fact that some of us are
never completed would have to be attributed to God: it would be He who
had not finished the work. But again I need not claim, what would in any
case be doubtful, that granting us freedom was a *risk worth taking* or
that the evils attendant thereupon are *costs worth bearing,* because I
do not believe that there is any matter of weighing up goods here.
Hirut, being a child, makes a child’s errors: that is not a price she
pays for childhood but a fact of childhood.[^14]

But all this may seem an overly abstract approach to the problem of
evil: the problem of evil is a problem about—among other
things—*suffering.* Suffering is no laughing matter, and it is likewise
a serious thing that we are imperfect and that we refuse to be obedient
to God’s will for us. But, to make a rather blunt appeal to my value
theory here, nothing is *just plain* good or bad. In particular, pain is
not just plain bad. Pain, like pleasure, plays an important biological
role, and its sheer visceral awfulness is required by that role—the
*inability* to feel pain is after all a serious medical problem.[^15]
Suffering is appropriate to damaged and imperfect creatures, and to the
extent that we are damaged and suffer thereby, things are as they should
be. It is where pain does not respond properly to damage that it is bad,
just as pleasure is bad when it is taken in what is perverse. The
special connection of pain to badness is not that it is somehow a
primitive evil, but that, in the typical case, it *registers* evils.

Conclusion: some implications
=============================

Some final observations. The first regards natural evils, about which I
may seem to have said nothing. On the Christian view, immortality goes
with perfection. There must then be ways for imperfect man to die. That
means natural evils. Not necessarily, maybe. Perhaps God could arrange
the world so that, like Tolkien’s elves, we could only die unnatural
deaths at each other’s hands. But then we might agree with Tolkien that
natural death is a generous gift for a stunted creature.[^16]

The second observation is that my proposal fits happily with our
evolutionary origins. This greatly pleases me, since evolution has been
thought, also by my earlier self, to make the problem of evil *more*
difficult. It fits rather less well with the view that there was any
such historical event as the fall. That, I believe, is satisfactory—true
both to our scientific understanding of the world and to fair biblical
interpretation. I believe the Genesis account is true, though not that
it is true *history.* It tells us that God created us and everything
around us, that God cares about us and requires our obedience, and that
things are in their imperfect state because of our failure to be
obedient. To all of this my view is amenable.

Finally, I want to go back to Geach, who could be a tough-minded man.

> [^17]

Paul says something similar in a difficult passage which however bothers
me less than it once did:

If God had made us to be no more than we now are, we should have no
cause for complaint. Paul and Geach are reminding us that it is a
mistake about value to suppose we ought to live, or could live better by
living, some life other than the one God has for us, or to think that
God could err in making us. So maybe we should turn our problem on its
head. If we feel ourselves to have grounds for complaint, this suggests
we think that we were made to live in some other way than we do. On what
grounds should we think such a thing? *My* grounds are that God promised
it. So perhaps Christians have the resources not only to turn the
complaint but to make it intelligible.

Dear Brendan:

I read and very much enjoyed your paper. A few thoughts:

I had a nebulous feeling that the organization could be improved. I will
read it again and try to be more specific tomorrow.

The main line of argument seemed to me to be quite compelling.

My main worry, in the ’one man’s modus ponens’ spirit, is that this
discussion suggests a severe worry for the semantics that you favor.
Consider:

There might be an all-powerful and knowing deity.

That deity decides to make some stuff. One of the things it decides to
make is some sufferers. Now, it turns out, that just as Mill suggested
that there are higher and lower pleasures, so in order to \*really\*
suffer, one has to have some rational capacities, attachments, plans,
etc. And the best kind of sufferer might thus not look structurally
terribly unlike a human being. So the deity constructs a world of
humanesque sufferers, and subjects them to exquisite torment.

Now, these things have been designed to suffer. They function best
according to plan when their suffering is \*really\* exquisite.

So, these creatures are achieving the good of their kind when suffering
exquisitely. For all we know, we might be these creatures. But a deity
who created only sufferers and a world that enabled them to suffer
perfectly seems terribly awful. This seems to reveal that there has to
be someting more to evaluation than this functional business most
broadly conceived (as functionally, everything is perfect here).

A further worry. Suppose that one bites the bullet on the above (!).
What is the sense in which we are evaluating God? The idea of the
problem of evil is that God is supposed to be perfectly good. But a good
what? It’s not clear what makes one a good member of the kind deity, and
we might think that deities cannot be artifacts. Perhaps ’good qua
creator’? But this looks dangerously just like it falls out of being
powerful (i.e. good qua creator would be: I want to create a thing that
is F, and what I create is /perfectly/ F: if I couldn’t do that, I
wouldn’t be all powerful, would I?).

I thus wonder if the stronger thing that falls out of the functional
account of goodness is that the problem of evil doesn’t make any sense,
because the disputed thesis that God is good turns out simply to be
unstatable.

I’m genuinely curious if the first thought experiment gives you pause
about the functional account, and if not, what your take is on it.

Again, though, a lovely paper, a novel idea, and a good thing to run at
a conference, due to its slightly shocking feel.

All the best,

Tristram

These are just some quick notes upon my first reading.

First, I noticed two typographical errors. On page 8: I believe a “were”
should be “we’re”. On page 9: the second sentence of the last paragraph
seems to be lacking a verb.

Second, I think more time is spent than is needed explaining your value
theory. I definitely think you should do so a bit where you do, but as
it stands, that section seems to constitute the majority of the paper.
And since you admittedly are interested only in clarifying your
position, and not defending it (which I think is perfectly fine),
there’s no need to devote so much space to it.

Third, I think if you cut that down any, you’ll have extra room to say
more interesting things about imperfection/incompletion. This section
does seem a bit too compressed. I think many of your readers will find
it difficult to get their minds around the idea of an omnipotent creator
whose creation is “incomplete.” After all, the central case of
incomplete creation seems to be that of a finite creator. Of course,
your point about savouring the process of creation is a helpful one. But
it raises an at least prima facie worry in what one might call The God
Case, viz. God’s existence outside of time; how can he in any way be
seen as savouring an intermediate stage in a time-extended process? Now
I take it this is the sort of question you don’t want to have to answer.
But I still get the feeling it might help your case more–and make it
seem less that you’re simply pushing the problem of evil back (some of
which pushing seems legitimate to me)–if you speculate on this aspect a
bit more. And it seems you could tell some sort of plausible theological
story.

To me, the word “incomplete” seems to imply imperfection. Maybe that’s
just me. It seems almost as though in some ways it would be more
accurate to say about humanity at its current stage that we’re merely in
an intermediate stage in a process of metaphysical development, similar
to the way in which a caterpillar is in an intermediate stage in its
metamorphotic development. It’s possible that this line of thought is
heretical, in which case I would not recommend adopting it. I really
don’t know.

Maybe none of that’s very helpful. I’ll think about this more and see if
I can make my own thoughts any more lucid.

I don’t know all that much about the philosophy of religion, but I don’t
know any other approach to the problem of evil along the lines of your
value theory. And it definitely seems to me a promising line of thought.

Best, Michael

From: mkjordan@uvic.ca Subject: RE: the problem of evil Date: November
19, 2006 11:59:54 PM EST To: britchie@fas.harvard.edu

hi brendan,

how is everything going? what is this conference you were thinking of
attending? anyways, looks like an interesting paper. i will go through
it in more detail as soon as i get some time. my intitial questions are
as follows though,

1\) have you modified your conception of God since we last talked? you
only refer to an almightly and benevolent being. but this can be taken
in a variety of senses from classical conceptions to less stringent or
“grand” conceptions. obviously the various versions of the problem of
evil will gain weight depending on which conception you are appealing to

2)it looks like you are jsut reponding to one particular version of the
argument. primarily that of evil acts humans perform. (of course
proponents will just push on you difffernt versions of the p of E) while
you do mention natural evil you dont have much to say on it. i gather
this is because you take it that it is the entiretly of creation, human
and non-human that is incomplete. but again the force of your argument
(esp in the latter half) is focused almost exclusively on human conduct.
of course this intuitively appealing, however without really specifying
in what way nature can be improved such that natural evil can be seen as
being in some sense incomplete (excluding human conduct) will grant the
propoent of the PofE a lot of playing room to respond

3\) you mention that your conception is compatible with evolutionary
theory. i wonder about the inclusion of this for the proponent of the p
of e can say that the evidential role that evil acts play can be traced
back to an evolutionary history such that it in no way indicates or can
be passed of as incompleteness but rather propper function cashed out
naturalistically.

4)going back to point 2. do you have anything to say about newer
versions of the p of e that primariily discuss excessive evil and or
divine hiddeness (checkout Swinburnes Existence of God ch 11. there seem
to be some similarities with your paper, actually check it out anyways,
he came up with asecond edition this year? and i wanted to know what you
think about it.)

[^1]: Peter Geach, “Good and Evil,” *Analysis* 17 (1956)

[^2]: See, for example, J. J. Thomson, “On Some Ways in Which a Thing
    Can Be Good.” *Social Philosophy and Policy* 9 (1992).

[^3]: But that is not inevitable. The Geachean view about value might
    also be amenable to the Kantian view that action has, just as such,
    aims and therefore standards internal to it. Action aspires to be
    action that satisfies those aims; good action is therefore action
    that achieves them. See, for example, Christine Korsgaard,
    “Self-Constitution in the Ethics of Plato and Kant,” *The Journal of
    Ethics,* vol. 3 no. 1 (March 1999).

[^4]: in Hursthouse, Lawrence, and Quinn eds., *Virtues and Reasons,*
    Oxford University Press (1995)

[^5]: *Natural Goodness,* p. 51; the quote about the Karamojong is
    borrowed from David Lamb’s *The Africans,* Vintage Books (1987), p.
    81. It is inessential to the example that the second description
    mentions only the Karamojong—it is an historical accident that they
    and not others behave this way; by a similar accident they might
    have been the only humans to respect rights. And yet respecting
    rights, and not starving boys, might be proper to human life.

[^6]: This follows Aristotle. A good life is not merely *success,* since
    certain functions might be as easily carried out in a coma, or even
    in death, as in action, and our concern is a practical one.
    Attention to the conceptual structure here also provides resources
    for responding to certain objections such as “what if we were
    designed to suffer?” But this is complicated and I will pursue the
    matter no further here.

[^7]: I have passed over, or at least not addressed at all directly,
    many important questions like “why think we have a function?” “why
    should we care whether we have a function?” and “what if it turned
    out we had some really weird function?” (But see n. 6.) I flag these
    questions only to avoid pretending that I’ve answered them.

[^8]: I shall have nothing to say specifically about animals in this
    paper. What I say about pain below is relevant, though, and will
    probably reveal the fact that I do not think the animal case
    particularly interesting.

[^9]: 1 John 3:2

[^10]: 1 Corinthians 3:9-15, Philippians 1:6, 2 Corinthians 4:16-17.

[^11]: There are, certainly, interesting stories about how this might
    have happened: my own favorite can be found in the first chapter of
    Tolkien’s *Silmarillion.*

[^12]: This is just an appeal to Christian dogma, of course.

[^13]: A sunset can be beautiful but not good; a painting of a sunset
    can be both. The difference is the technical aspect that is involved
    in painting. To see the craft our world displays, compare it to the
    one described by C. S. Lewis in “The Shoddy Lands.”

[^14]: In particular my view is not like that of John Hick or Irenaeus,
    though we share the idea that evils exist because humans are not yet
    what they are meant to be. For Hick, soul-making is *worth* the
    suffering, and there is much abstract talk of “realizing value.”
    Part of Irenaeus’ line of thought is similar; he suggests what
    Tolkien has put so well, that without the present darkness “we
    should not know, or so much love, what we do love.” I make no appeal
    to a balance of good over evil, or to any good that evil brings.
    Irenaeus also defends the gradual creation of man by appeal to the
    claim that humans are “too new” to be perfect. But I do not think
    the creative process that has been employed needs to be defended by
    appeal to creative constraints. It is the Creator’s to do as He
    will.

[^15]: CNN once reported on a girl with a congenital incapacity to feel
    pain: “Some people would say that’s a good thing. But no, it’s not,”
    says Tara Blocker, Ashlyn’s mother. “Pain’s there for a reason. It
    lets your body know something’s wrong and it needs to be fixed. I’d
    give anything for her to feel pain.” I found this remarkable
    statement on September 16th, 2006, at
    http://www.general-anaesthesia.com/congenital-insensitivity/nopain.html.

[^16]: Natural evils result in both more and less than death, of course.
    It is indeed a feature of our present life that we are part of a
    natural world which contains, besides death, destruction and pain
    and decay. But then this is just a more general feature of what it
    is for a human to be incomplete.

[^17]: *Providence and Evil,* Cambridge University Press (1977), p. 127

