--- layout: post title: Socrates’ Conception of Knowledge ---

Unscientific polling on my part has revealed that, when asked for examples of things they know, modern English speakers always give examples in (or appropriate to) propositional form: “I know that Addis Ababa is the capital of Ethiopia” or “God loves me”—that sort of thing. Nobody has ever said anything like “carpentry” or “how to play the piano.” That is the situation in contemporary philosophy as well, where epistemologists emphasize knowledge of particular facts; Thus Robert Audi, in a recent introduction to epistemology, can say flatly that “knowledge is constituted by belief (of a certain kind).”[^1]

But it doesn’t take much acquaintance with Plato’s earlier dialogues to know that Socrates *loves* examples of the other sort. In particular, examples of practices of the skilled, often professional variety which were called “*technai*.”[^2] Socrates’ contemporaries certainly noticed this: Callicles complains that Socrates never lets up with his “continual talk of shoemakers and cleaners, cooks and doctors”; Xenophon even records the Athenian tyrants warning Socrates that he had better lay off discussing carpenters and herdsmen and blacksmiths and the like.[^3]

Modern readers do not exactly miss these examples, but the *significance* of *techne* in the early dialogues is often ill-appreciated. It is not always seen that Socrates’ scattered reflections on *techne*—which constitute a very significant part of the dialogues—constitute, in fact, reflections on knowledge. Thus so great and sympathetic an interpreter as Gregory Vlastos was able to say that Socrates was “exclusively a moral philosopher.”[^4]

On occasion Socratic epistemology *is* taken up in its own right, but then *techne* generally gets too little emphasis. Hugh Benson is by no means alone in saying that for Socrates, knowledge is more like understanding than like the (for us) more familiar justified true belief.[^5] He offers some “paradigmatic examples of the kind of understanding [he has] in mind”:

> We say things like Einstein understands gravity, Richard Feynmann > understands quantum mechanics, R. G. Collingwood understands history, > or James Boswell understands Samuel Johnson.[^6]

But Callicles does not complain that Socrates never leaves off talking about cosmological theories; the tyrants do not warn Socrates that he should stop talking about historical figures or battles. To talk only of “understanding” leaves us in the dark as to why this should be. We would do better to put more emphasis on *techne* in particular.

Scholarly interest in *techne* has instead mainly been due to interest in the so-called “craft analogy”—the supposed Socratic analogy between virtue and *techne*. But even then the *distinctiveness* of Socrates’ conception of *techne* often goes unnoticed. Terence Irwin, author of perhaps the most important recent book on Plato’s moral theory, tells us that “Socrates does not say exactly what he takes to be implied by saying that something is a craft [i.e. a *techne*] or is similar to a craft.” He goes on:

> Aristotle, however, has a fairly clear and explicit view of the > character of a craft. It is useful, then, to replace the rather > imprecise question ‘Does Socrates treat virtue as a craft?’ with the > more precise question ‘Does Socrates treat virtue as the sort of thing > that Aristotle regards as a craft?’[^7]

But Socrates certainly says enough about *techne* to distinguish his conception thereof from Aristotle’s, and it is a mistake to suppose that two conceptions are close enough for interpretative purposes.

We moderns do talk about knowledge of non-propositional varieties all the time. And Socrates talks about propositional varieties of knowledge. But, generally, once we start thinking *about* knowledge, we start thinking about knowledge in propositional form. And Socrates, when he starts to think about knowledge, thinks about *techne*. It is not too much to say that, for Socrates, knowledge just *is* *techne*. And so in this essay I describe the Socratic conception of knowledge, and argue that it *is* the Socratic conception of knowledge that I’m describing. In other words, I describe the Socratic conception of *techne*, explaining how it is different from other conceptions of *techne* (in §1), and I explain why that is tantamount to describing the Socratic conception of knowledge altogether (in §§2–4).

Techne in Plato’s Early Dialogues =================================

As ‘*techne*’ was a term of commendation, there were disputes about whether given practices deserved the title.[^8] Socrates himself engages in such disputation: he views medicine as a genuine *techne*, but raises questions about the status of poetry, ‘cookery,’ and rhetoric. Nor is it only Socrates raising such questions in the early dialogues: in the *Laches*, Nicias assumes that fighting in armour is a *techne*, while Laches has doubts.[^9]

Disagreements as to which practices were *technai* were complicated, and engendered, by the fact that different people had different ideas about what a *techne* should be or do. For example, when you hire a craftsman, should you be able to expect that he deliver what you hire him for? That would be a natural expectation of a builder, but what about a doctor? And should a genuine *techne* be theoretical, and in what way theoretical? Or might a mere body of experience also constitute a *techne*? Thus, to take one example, we find the author of the Hippocratic *On Ancient Medicine* (hereafter *VM*) arguing that medicine’s status as a *techne* does not depend on incorporating into it the sorts of physical theories expounded by the natural philosophers.[^10]

By attending to the debates about the nature of *techne* which we find in the contemporary literature, and to various remarks about *techne* in the early dialogues, we can identify a distinctively Socratic (or early-Platonic) conception of *techne*. Here in §1 I discuss three important features of *techne* as Socrates understands it, which together give us a good general picture, and each of which emerges in discussions about whether certain practices constitute *technai* or whether certain individuals possess a *techne*. I begin with the scope of craft knowledge, in §1.1. Within its proper domain, Socrates says that “wisdom would never err” (*Euthydemus* 280a), so I try, in §1.2, to explain what that means. For Socrates the reliable attainment of genuine goods is in part a result of the craftsman’s rational and articulate understanding, which I discuss in §1.3. In §1.4 I deal briefly with some problems stemming from the Socratic treatment of virtue as a *techne*.[^11]

The Scope of Techne -------------------

One may get at the nature of a *techne* by way of its subject matter. Thus Socrates asks Gorgias: “with which of the things there are is oratory concerned?”[^12] And a *techne* is systematic, so that its subject matter (or *pragma*) has a natural integrity.[^13] In the *Laches* the proposal that courage might be knowledge of future goods and evils is rejected on the grounds that there is no such thing as knowledge concerned with farming *in the future* in particular, or with health or strategy *in the future.* The topic will just be health *period*, or strategy, or farming, or goods and evils generally (198d–199d). Similarly Ion is taken to task for the suggestion that he knows and can interpret only the works of Homer, but that as far as other poets go he “has no power to contribute anything worthwhile” (*Ion* 532b-c). One learns, or should learn, “a subject as a whole” (532e); i.e. poetry, or sculpture, not specific poets or sculptors.

Socrates characterizes the subjects of craft knowledge in fairly intuitive terms: the odd and the even, health, houses—often it’s a product the craftsman can bring about. Socrates tells us in the *Ion* that when he finds forms of knowledge dealing with different subjects (*pragmata*), then he calls them different *technai*, while the same subject means the same *techne* (537d–e). He illustrates the point by observing that both he and Ion know that Socrates has five fingers on a hand, and it’s by the same *techne*—namely arithmetic—that they know this. But this idea about distinct subject matters shouldn’t be interpreted too strictly.[^14] In the *Gorgias* both gymnastics and medicine concern the body, but the one provides preventative care while the other is restorative. Similarly, at *Gorgias* 451b–c we find that both *arithmetike* and *logistike* have as subjects “even and odd”; the further difference seems to be the *way* these *technai* deal with number, or the use they put it to. So we are working here with the intuitive idea that each *techne* has, like a science, its own proper field, along with its own particular principles and point.[^15]

The Reliability of Techne -------------------------

A *techne* was expected to bring about success within its proper area, and proneness to failure could call the *techne*-status of a given practice into question.[^16] Nevertheless some forms of failure could be thought compatible with *techne*. One possibility is that, whatever might ideally be accomplished through *techne*, any given craftsman might make mistakes, as a result, perhaps, of inexperience or lack of aptitude. Socrates allows for the possibility of this kind of failure, for example at *Euthydemus* 279e–280a, where he contrasts wise and foolish doctors or generals. But so far that says nothing about potential limits on *techne* proper.

Another type of failure comes out in a supposed contrast between building (*tektonike*) and medicine, the former of which seems to have been an early paradigm of *techne.*[^17] There was a trope to the effect that when you call the builder you will get a house—and you won’t get a house otherwise. But other putative craftsman aren’t always successful. Doctors don’t always restore people to health, and, what’s more, people are sometimes restored to health without the aid of doctors. On such grounds some denied that medicine was a *techne* at all. The orator or sophist, too, was susceptible to such charges, especially given his sometimes extravagant claims to be able to teach virtue. Again it was observed that these teachers were not always successful (how interesting that they insist on securing payment up front!), and that their students were sometimes surpassed by the untrained.[^18]

In the Hippocratic *De Arte* the response to such charges is as follows. Nature (*phusis*) sets limits on what is possible for the medical art. For example, fire is the ultimate cauterizer available to medicine—if this cauterizer is insufficient in some cases, that is no fault of medicine. The doctor still knows what can and cannot be helped, and what to do in cases that *are* amenable to treatment. Now it is important that limitations are blamed on *phusis* here. *Techne* was often viewed as a way of mastering or overcoming *tuche*—i.e. chance or luck.[^19] So we get a distinction between the vicissitudes of fortune, against which medicine, like any good *techne*, is insurance, and the inexorable workings of nature, which the doctor will understand but could not be expected to resist. (As for the fact that some people get better without a doctor, that may be credited to their doing what the doctor *would* have recommended.[^20]) Now *De Arte* still offers us an impressively demanding standard for *techne*: Allen observes that the defender of this view “seems to envisage . . . a physician who will at no point undertake cures with less than complete confidence of success” (85).

Socrates’ understanding of the reliability of *techne* seems to accord with the sort of treatment found in *De Arte*. On the one hand, Socrates treats medicine as a paradigmatic *techne*, and there’s no reason to suppose that he or anyone else would have thought that a doctor could heal anyone no matter what their injuries or age or health. So Socrates could hardly have a *more* stringent view than the one found in *De Arte*. On the other hand, his view seems to be no *less* stringent either. In the *Euthydemus*, Socrates, adducing a variety of *technai*, deploys the notion that *techne* is a guard against bad *tuche* (279d ff.), finally going so far as to say that *sophia* (here a synonym for *‘techne’*) *is* (good) *tuche* (279d), or at any rate provides it (282a). Here Socrates, like the author of *De Arte*, tries to push luck out of the picture altogether.[^21] At *Euthydemus* 280a, ‘being lucky’ is glossed as ‘never making mistakes,’[^22] and at least this latter characterization of *techne* is found elsewhere, for example at *Protagoras* 357d–e. It is also found in *Republic* I, where Thrasymachus says that craftsmen, insofar as they are craftsmen, never make mistakes (340e), and Socrates falls in line with this, too (342b). The context is the question whether a ruler will ever mistakenly issue laws which in fact turn out to be detrimental to himself, so the point seems to be that if a *techne* is being practiced properly *then the craftsman should always be successful* (within the realm of possibility, presumably). So again the possibility of sheer misfortune is pushed out of the picture.[^23]

Later Plato will take a more generous view. While in the *Gorgias* Socrates insists that mere experience and guessing are the marks of something *less* than *techne* (462b–c, 465a, 501a), the *Philebus* has him distinguishing a class of “less precise” *technai* which rely on guesswork (*stochasmos*) rooted in experience, which would thus be less reliable (55e–56a). A later development still, with Aristotle and other writers, was the notion of a stochastic *techne* (which need not be untheoretical).[^24] Here we would distinguish between competent application of the methods associated with a *techne* and actual successful outcome, or between the exercise of a *techne* and the aim of that *techne*. This would seem to offer a more appropriate model for medicine: we would no longer expect the doctor to know in every case whether or not the treatment will succeed; medicine would provide no *absolute* guarantee against luck. But, again, these are later developments.

Techne and Explanation ----------------------

For Socrates, *technai* are reliable because they are rational. In the *Gorgias* Polus says that “it is experience that causes our times to march along the way of craft, whereas inexperience causes them to march along the way of chance,” and while we see the common contrast between *techne* and *tuche* here, Socrates finds this statement inadequate.[^25] Thus he later says that when some practice “has no rational account by which it applies the things it applies, to say what they are by nature, so that it cannot say what is the explanation of each thing,” then that practice is merely a product of experience (*empeiria*), and not a *techne*. Socrates goes on: “I don’t call anything a craft which is unreasoning” (*alogos*—465a). He derides Polus’ own ‘*techne*’ of rhetoric, comparing it to “cookery,” which “by habit and experience . . . keeps only memory of what usually happens.”[^26]

A craftsman then understands the nature of the things he is dealing with. A doctor, for example, would know “what sight itself is” (*Laches* 189e–190a). The same expectation is strongly intimated at *Gorgias* 459c–e. It has been observed that the orator may be more persuasive concerning medicine even than a doctor, at least among the ignorant, but he “isn’t knowledgeable in the thing in which a doctor is knowledgeable” (459b). Socrates asks whether

> the orator is in the same position with respect to what’s just and > unjust, what’s shameful and admirable, what’s good and bad, as he is > about what’s healthy and about the subjects of the other crafts? > (459d)

The doctor, by implication, *would* know health and whatever else his *techne* concerns, and a rhetorical *techne* ought to be similar.[^27]

In the *Gorgias,* the contrast between *techne* and *empeiria* is treated as a contrast not just between understanding and mere experience, but as a contrast between *aiming at something good with understanding* and *aiming at mere pleasure by guesswork* (464a–465d, 500a–b). I take the point to be that if you don’t understand the nature of your aims and of your subject matter, then you’re in no position to know what would be the “good condition” of the things you treat.[^28] Thus you cannot aim at that good condition but only, and only by guesswork, at what will please some person at some time. We might contrast an idealized cobbler, who knows the support a foot needs and how to provide it, with a shoe designer, who is concerned with aesthetic pleasure rather than comfort or health. The cobbler’s principles are always the same; the trends are ever-changing and unpredictable.[^29]

Socrates’ interest in *what things are* has been described as an interest in real as opposed to nominal definitions. This is fair in the sense that Socrates expects experts to be be able to articulate their knowledge. Doctors and laymen alike *talk* about health, and can point to examples of healthy people, or give general characterizations of health—as “good condition of the body,” for example. But the layman relies on more superficial signs, and is liable to error, while the doctor can tell healthy people apart from those who merely appear healthy (*Gorgias* 464a–b).[^30] The doctor’s ability to give a “real definition” of health is a reflection of this ability to distinguish appearance from reality. So to know what the qualities in question are is, in part, to be able to employ *and explain* reliable standards of assessment.

The interest in definitions should not be construed as an interest in knowledge which may be captured by a verbal formula.[^31] Knowledge of a given entity or quality, in the sense Socrates is concerned with, already indicates mastery of the whole rational practice that constitutes a *techne*.[^32] But because the expert can articulate his reasoning, putative experts may be interrogated. And so we have the familiar type of Socratic question: “what is courage?” or “what is piety?”[^33] As Angela Smith points out, requests for definitions follow declarations of expertise: the requests are a *test*.[^34] And this is only *one* Socratic test for expertise. In some cases we can just *tell* whether a wall or a shoe, say, is a good one. So one way of telling a craftsman is by his work; another is by his pedigree, or his students.[^35] In several dialogues we see Socrates trying to elicit a suitable delineation of the scope of some supposed *techne*.[^36] But the influential notion that Socrates is primarily interested in deductive knowledge, or knowledge of definitions, seems to be a result of taking one of Socrates’ investigative tools as too much representative of his whole conception of knowledge.[^37]

Techne and Virtue -----------------

I said that much of the scholarly interest in *techne* has circled around Socrates’ frequent comparisons of virtue with various *technai*. Socrates makes these comparisons because he thinks that virtue is knowledge, and that knowledge is *techne*.[^38] However this is a matter of much controversy, because many scholars think that *technai* have features unsuitable to virtue.[^39] Which leads to a problem for my central thesis, since if you think that virtue cannot be a *techne*, you will probably still think that virtue is knowledge (that being an important Socratic thesis), so that it would be easy to think (mistakenly) that *techne* is just one form of knowledge among others for Socrates.

And a seemingly attractive line of thought supports the idea that Socrates would be interested in the craft analogy even if he doesn’t himself think that virtue is a *techne*: a lot of people were running around Greece claiming to teach virtue—claiming, in fact, a moral *techne*. Socrates was showing how wrong this was. Perhaps he thought that the example of *techne* could be used to illuminate the nature of virtue to some extent, but it was a typically sophistic rather than Socratic idea that you could really posses a full-blown moral *techne*. But that line of thought becomes less attractive once we realize how Socartes’ conception of *techne* differs from that of his interlocutors. He never shows that Gorgias or Polus lack a moral *techne* as *they* understand that notion; in fact Socrates insists that they have the *wrong* understanding of *techne*. This is a rather frivolous exercise unless Socrates thinks that virtue really *is*, or *ought to be,* a *techne*.[^40]

And perhaps attention to the distinctive features of Socratic *techne* could also show us how to get out of the difficulty about unappealing features of *technai*. Here is an illustration of how that might go. One worry is that if virtue is a *techne*, then virtue will be of only instrumental value, and Socrates surely does not think *that.*[^41] Now I don’t think it’s clear that Socrates thinks *technai* are of only instrumental value.[^42] But even if we suppose that he does, one aspect of *techne* suggests that an exception might be made for the case of virtue. What I have in mind is *techne*’s mastery of luck (§1.2). If a *techne* overcomes luck within a given domain, then one might aspire to a master-*techne* which overcomes luck altogether—the sort of thing Socrates describes as being or superseding luck in the *Euthydemus* (279d ff.). And once you have the notion of such a *techne*, it’s a short leap to the notion of a *techne* which is intrinsically rather than instrumentally good, since good luck (or fortune) may itself be thought of as a or indeed *the* intrinsic good: Socrates says everyone considers good fortune the greatest good (*Euthydemus* 279c), and Aristotle says that good fortune (*eutuche*) is or is near to well-being (*eudaimonia*—*Physics* 197b3–4).[^43]

Socrates recognizes the difficulties his model of knowledge presents for an understanding of virtue. But that does not mean he rejects that model of knowledge—after all, he has no other. It’s interesting rather to see how that model can be adapted in different ways or how other aspects of Socrates’ thought are suited to fit with his conception of of knowledge. Another example can be drawn from another way that *technai* are problematically instrumental: they can be misused, put to work thwarting their natural ends as well as advancing them, as Socrates points out in the *Hippias Minor*. Aristotle gives this as a reason for saying that virtue is not a *techne*; some scholars think Socrates is trying to make that point too.[^44] But in fact, as I will explain in §2, the denial of *akrasia* ensures that virtue will not *actually* be abused, so Socrates already has a way out of this problem, without giving up the view that virtue is a *techne*. Plato later takes a different approach, since in the *Republic* he accepts the reality of *akrasia*. But the *Republic* emphasizes the role of practice and experience in *techne*; a substantial portion of the *Republic* discusses cultivation of the character that is a prerequisite for moral knowledge. And this means that even though Plato makes conceptual space for *akrasia*, his understanding of *techne*-possession allows him to hold that virtue is knowledge, and that knowledge is *techne*, but again without the implication that virtue might be abused. So in neither case does the *techne*-model itself need to be rejected or relegated to a lesser role.[^45]

Techne and Propositional Knowledge ==================================

In the *Protagoras*, Socrates and Protagoras discuss the claim, attributed to the many, that one can know what one should do, and yet not do it. Socrates and Protagoras disagree with the many; they think that knowledge is “strong” and would not succumb to temptation that way. And this seems to be an explicit discussion of the nature of knowledge in the context of an example of *propositional knowledge*. So how does the existence of such discussions fit with my claim that, for Socrates, knowledge just is *techne*? To begin answering that question, it’s best to begin with this very treatment of *akrasia* in the *Protagoras*.

Socrates argues that *akrasia* is impossible. The argument is framed as a refutation of the many, who *do* believe in *akrasia*: they believe that, thinking you should do one thing, you can be “overwhelmed” by fear or the prospect of some pleasure, and act contrary to your better judgement.[^46] Socrates first foists hedonism on his opponents—the best action, they would agree, is the most pleasant action, or the action most productive of pleasure over time. But then, given hedonism, for some pleasure to overwhelm you is for some *good* to overwhelm you. And this good which “overwhelms” you must not be the greater good, or you would not be doing anything wrong by pursuing it. So being overwhelmed must entail choosing lesser goods over greater. But Socrates finds this unintelligible, since there is no longer a question of being deceived by pleasures and pains distinct from the goods and evils in question (255d–e).[^47] Or again, by hedonism, being overwhelmed would have to mean choosing lesser pleasures over greater. But, says Socrates, there is nothing more to comparing the values of two sets of pleasures and pains than weighing them up against each other, and weighing is treated as a purely quantitative matter (256a). So now again, Socrates thinks, there is nothing here to be overwhelmed by: it is not intelligible that a person would choose a set of pleasures which they see to be the smaller. *Akrasia,* then, is impossible. Whatever you believe it best to do you will in fact do.[^48]

But in Socrates’ view, to believe that some course of action is best is largely worthless from the perspective of producing that action. The “power of appearances,” we are told, causes us “to wander and to change back and forth, to accept and reject the same things in actions and in choices of large and small” (i.e. large and small pleasures; *Protagoras* 356d). So we do what we believe best—but we are easily misled, and we easily change our minds. (You have resolved to avoid unhealthy foods, but the offer of a tempting dessert prompts you to make an exception, since after all it would be rude to refuse—but immediately the thing is consumed, you know that your host would have been perfectly understanding.)[^49]

But beliefs are not strictly *always* unstable or untrustworthy. In the *Crito* Socrates tells the eponymous character that we should be attentive to the beliefs of wise people rather than to those of foolish people (46d–47b). It is to the knowledgeable that things will appear as they are—a point also of the *Gorgias.* Now the wise are not wise merely on account of having the right views; rather they may be expected to have the right views—i.e. the right beliefs—because they are wise. And it thus matters a great deal whether we ourselves have the wisdom that ensures we see things the right way, especially given the denial of *akrasia*.

This is just the point Socrates goes on to make in the *Protagoras.* Here the issue is knowledge of the good in general, and after describing the instability of mere belief, Socrates says that our “salvation” will be a “craft of measurement,” which would

> render the appearance ineffective: by making clear the truth, it would > cause the soul to be at peace by abiding in the truth, and so save our > life. (356d–e)

Socrates says that this moral master-*techne* is a mathematical one (since it involves measurement), and indeed he identifies it with arithmetic (357a).[^50] But the general point of importance for us is the role of knowledge—and specifically *techne*—in ensuring correct beliefs in particular cases.

Beliefs have many sources besides one’s own expertise: wishful thinking, sadness or anger, nearby pleasures or faraway pains, optical illusions, the advice of experts or of charlatans. These forces sometimes compete, and some are stronger than others. So, in the speeches of Phaedrus and Agathon in the *Symposium,* love dominates other emotions: fear would not drive you from battle while you fight beside your beloved. Likewise, in the *Gorgias*, Socrates concedes that the testimony of the orator, who knows how to play on the emotions, will, among the ignorant, be more compelling than the testimony of a genuine expert. But, according to Socrates, knowledge (if you possess it yourself) dominates all other sources of belief. That is what he means by saying that knowledge is *strong,* as he puts it in the *Protagoras* (352b): without a *techne*, your beliefs are at the mercy of other forces; if you possess a *techne*, you will think the right way about the appropriate cases.[^51]

Now the original dispute between Socrates and the many was actually about whether it is possible to *know* what to do *in a particular case* and yet not to do it. Can you know, say, that you ought to get out of bed right now, but not do it because the blankets are so warm? As we have now seen, Socrates’ response is two-fold: first he argues against the possibility of *akrasia*, and then he explains how a hypothetical *techne* of measurement would ensure that the comfort of the warm blanket won’t fool you into thinking you should stay in bed. The result is that your craft knowledge delivers you (and allows you to maintain) the correct belief that you ought to get up, or—to fall in line with the way the many originally made their claim—the (propositional) knowledge that you ought to get up.[^52]

In the *Crito* Socrates calls the views that stem from (craft) knowledge “good beliefs,” but sometimes he simply calls such views *knowledge*, just as the many talked of knowledge of particular facts in the *Protagoras.* Thus we see Socrates asking Ion whether each of them don’t know that Socrates has five fingers on his hand “by the same craft, that of arithmetic”? (537e). That is, because you know (the craft of) arithmetic, you can know (the fact that) there are five fingers on a hand.[^53] Likewise the charioteer will be the one to judge advice on racing, and so also the doctor and the pilot in their respective spheres (537). We therefore find that in different senses *techne* *is* knowledge and *is a source of* knowledge.[^54] But of course the fact that Socrates is often interested in knowledge which represents the exercise of a *techne* should not be permitted to obscure the centrality of *techne* in his epistemological thought.

Other Varieties of Knowledge? =============================

But it must be allowed that Socrates also talks about, or attributes, knowledge even where no (actually possessed) *techne* seems to be in question. For example, Charmides knows Greek (*Charmides* 159a); in the *Apology* Socrates says: “to do injustice and disobey my superior, this I know to be evil and base” (29b); in the *Gorgias* he says “I know well that if you will agree with me on those things which my soul believes, those things will be the very truth” (486e). So if knowedge is *techne*, what’s happening in passages such as these?

Socrates’ claims to moral knowledge may be thought particularly problematic. Although Socrates occasionally claims moral knowledge, he also disavows moral knowledge in sweeping terms. After examining one politician, Socrates reflects as follows:

> I am indeed wiser than he. It is unlikely that either of us knows > anything noble or good, but he thinks that he knows something which he > does not know, whereas, as I don’t actually know, neither do I think I > do. (*Apology* 21d)

In the *Meno* we find him saying flatly, “I confess to my shame that I have no knowledge at all about virtue” (71d). I read these statements as disavowals of a moral *techne*, as when Socrates denies having that *techne*, claimed by others, which would allow him to train children in goodness (e.g. at *Apology* 19e–20c, *Laches* 186a–c). So it would seem that Socrates’ confidence on specific moral questions *cannot* be founded on possession of a moral *techne*.

What’s more, Socrates apparently supposes that you cannot know anything about e.g. virtue without knowing what virtue is (which I take to mean that without possessing the virtue-*techne* you cannot know anything about virtue), and also that you cannot know whether something is e.g. admirable (*kalon*) without knowing what the admirable *is* (i.e. without having the *techne* which takes the admirable as its object).[^55] So not only does Socrates claim knowledge where there seems to be no *techne*, he claims knowledge where he *disavows* the appropriate *techne*, and even says that, lacking such expertise, he *can’t* have any knowledge.

Some scholars have felt that there is a genuine *problem* here—a tension or contradiction between the avowals and the disavowals of knowledge. They suggest that different dialogues reveal diverging epistemological standards, or that some apparent knowledge claims can be treated as somehow anomalous.[^56] But such manuevers seem to me unnecessary.

Suppose someone asked me what I knew about category theory, in such a way as to make me suspect he had an interest in learning about it. Probably I would say that I knew nothing about it; maybe that “I don’t know the first thing about it.” But if some nerdy party game required me to list the things I know about category theory, well, then: its name starts with a ‘C’; it’s a highly abstract logical-mathematical system; its connectives are very powerful. And it is perfectly ordinary and intelligible that I should in this way be able to say both that I know nothing about category theory and that I know lots of things about category theory. Philosophically speaking, there are different ways we might sort out my claims. We might invoke some form of contextualist semantics for knowledge attribution, whereby different standards are established by different conversational settings. Or we might distinguish different senses of ‘know,’ so that in one sense of ‘know’ I might know that P if I have it on good testimony; in another sense I might know that P only if I can explain why it is that P. Again, we might say that there is a difference in the kinds of things I am claiming to know: in the first case I am claiming to know a particular fact, and in the second case denying that I’m familiar with a subject matter.

Bearing in mind plausible strategies of these sorts, I do not see any need to be very concerned about inconsistencies between Socrates’ various attributions of knowledge. And indeed the issue for most scholars has been not so much to worry that Socrates’ various knowledge claims and ascriptions are contradictory, but to determine *what sort of knowledge* Socrates is avowing when he avows knowledge, and *what sort of knowledge* he is disavowing when he disavows knowledge.[^57]

But it would be a mistake to attribute *to Socrates himself* a *reflective conception* of any form of knowledge besides *techne*. What there are in the early dialogues are attributions of knowledge which do not fit the *techne*-conception. But to find in such knowledge-attributions a *conception of a form of knowledge* would be to find a Socratic form of knowledge which would have to be “characterized almost entirely in negative terms.”[^58] And contrast with the fairly clear and demanding standards for craft knowledge, Socrates would apparently have *no* particular criteria for any sort of non-expert knowledge.[^59] At best we might hope to identify some ways Socrates thinks you could come by such knowledge—by divine revelation, perhaps, or as derived from a life’s experience interrogating others.[^60]

To say “I know X,” and thereby to claim knowledge of some form—with however much confidence or care or sincerity—is not thereby to deploy a conception of that form of knowledge. It does not amount to having a view about that form of knowledge or even to distinguishing it from others. Socrates talks about knowing *technai*, people, inanimate objects, qualities, and languages, but that is not cause for supposing either that he thinks these all involve the same sort of knowledge or that he has conceptions of five different types of knowledge. Perhaps Socrates *could* have distinguished, say, the kind of knowledge a craftsman has from the (propositional, factual) knowledge which the (merely) experienced person has. Later Aristotle did just that (e.g. *Metaphysics* 981a28–30). But Socrates only spoke a language for which such distinctions *could* be drawn.[^61]

We may decide that the Socratic conception of knowledge is defective in some way, or that it covers only a limited range of the epistemological phenomena, and we may even think that some of his own claims to knowledge show this. We could say that his attributions of knowledge are actually incoherent, or we could defend the coherence of his attributions by invoking a contextualist semantics. But my topic is Socrates’ *own* conception or conceptions of knowledge. And as far as I can see, the only variety of knowledge of which he has any conception is *techne*.

Knowledge as Techne ===================

We’ve seen thus far that Socrates has a distinctive and reflective conception of at least one form of knowledge, namely *techne*. We’ve also seen that a lot of Socrates’ epistemological reflections should be understood within the *techne*-framework. Thus the interest in knowing “what things are” reflects one of Socrates criteria for *techne*-possession; propositional knowledge is often the manifestation of expertise. And while many references to knowledge in the early dialogues cannot be understood in terms of *techne*, they do not go so far as to indicate that Socrates recognizes different varieties of knowledge. But to establish my claim that, in Socrates mind, knowledge is *techne*, I ought to show some *positive tendency* on his part to interpret knowledge as *techne*. I give some illustrations of just such a tendency here.

One example we have already touched on is from the *Protagoras.* There Socrates sets out to show that knowledge (*episteme*) is strong, rather than weak, as the many suppose (352b). This is proved precisely by showing that a *techne* (specifically a craft of measurement) will ensure that you get things right (at 356a–357e). So Socrates proves his point with the assumption that ‘*episteme*’ may be replaced by ‘*techne*.’[^62] Now ‘*episteme*’ is indeed frequently synonymous with ‘*techne*’ in the Socratic dialogues, but if Socrates is thinking of *episteme* in terms of *techne* right from the start at 352b, that would itself be surprising.[^63] The issue between Socrates and the many at that point is not the value of *techne* but the effect of knowing *what the right action in given circumstances* is (see esp. 352d). But Socrates *treats* the view of the many as a challenge to the value of knowledge *taken as* *techne*.

Another example is at *Charmides* 165, where Critias proposes that temperance is knowing oneself. Socrates says that if temperance is knowing (*gignoskein*), then it must be some kind of *episteme*, and it must be *of something*; his examples are medicine and housebuilding, which are ‘of’ health and building houses respectively. Though he then grants (at 166a) that knowledge need not *always* have a product (as evidenced by mathematical knowledge), Socrates continues to assume that knowledge must be useful. So here again we have an immediate transition from knowledge to *techne* (‘*episteme*’ is here equivalent to ‘*techne*,’ which also appears several times in this passage). It is notable how peculiar this transition is: Socrates apparently supposes that self-knowledge could only be interpreted as some kind of *techne*, despite the fact that there is *obviously* no *techne* in the neighborhood—as the rest of the dialogue makes clear enough—nor any evident reason to suppose right at the start that there should be.

The *Charmides* example is also interesting on account of the vocabulary employed. According to John Lyon’s analysis of Plato’s epistemological vocabulary, the verbs ‘*eidenai*,’ ‘*epistasthai*,’ and ‘*gignoskein*’ are grouped in the following way: ‘*eidenai*’ is largely interchangeably with either ‘*epistasthai*’ or ‘*gignoskein*,’ but ‘*epistasthai*’ and ‘*gignoskein*’ are not themselves interchangeable.[^64] And ‘*epistasthai*’ and ‘*gignoskein*’ play somewhat different roles. For example, ‘*gignoskein*,’ unlike ‘*epistasthai*,’ is particularly associated with personal nouns,[^65] while ‘*epistasthai*’ is in general a “generator” for ‘*techne*,’ in the sense that if someone knows in the sense of *epistasthai*, then you can invoke a corresponding *techne*.[^66] Now in the *Charmides* passage, we move from ‘*gignoskein*’ to ‘*techne*.’ But the example is not at odds with Lyons’ analysis. Socrates only speaks of *techne* after eliciting from Critias some examples of what are in fact conventional *technai*, but under the heading of ‘*episteme*,’ and this may very well reflect the fact that ‘*gignoskein*’ is not so naturally associated with ‘*techne*.’ What we see here is an *inference* on Socrates’ part: we have a case of knowing something (*gignoskein ti*) and *therefore* also of *episteme* and then *techne*. And this shows that Socrates is prepared to infer a *techne* not only where the sort of knowledge in question (knowing oneself) seems to have no evident connection with *techne*, but also where the specific epistemic vocabulary has no particular connection with *techne* in general Platonic usage.[^67]

The *Ion* furnishes another example we’ve touched on. At 537c–e Socrates is discussing the way different *technai* have different subject matters.

> Take these fingers: I know there are five of them, and you know the > same thing about them that I do. Now suppose I ask you whether it’s > the same craft—that of arithmetic—that teaches you and me the same > things, or whether it’s two different ones. Of course you’d say it’s > the same one.[^68]

It’s not surprising that *techne* comes up here, because that’s the topic, but the suggestion that it’s in virtue of a *techne* that we know something so simple as that we have five fingers is interesting—it certainly isn’t the case that anyone who can count to five is a mathematician. So Socrates seems quite prepared to subsume very mundane sorts of knowledge under *techne*.

That suggests another general point: Socrates doesn’t concern himself with knowledge that can come *only* in bits and pieces, such as historical knowledge.[^69] Now the lack of discussion of such knowledge doesn’t prove much on its own, since Socrates’ emphasis on moral knowledge will naturally make practical varieties of knowledge more prominent.[^70] But we can sharpen the point by considering the treatment of poetry and oratory. Not only does Socrates not consider these *technai*, he never considers the possibility that they might still involve impressive bodies of psychological or dramatic knowledge—though there were, after all, rhetorical *manuals.* The choices seem to be: *techne* or nothing. We can see this at *Gorgias* 464c-465a, where it’s clear that to say that rhetoric (or here “flattery,” of which rhetoric is a sub-type) is not a *techne* is *thereby* to say that it *just guesses.* This is typical for Socrates: if you’re having success, then it’s because of *techne*, or else merely a result of guessing or divine inspiration or madness.[^71]

I don’t know that such examples could be considered decisive. If poets and orators were claiming a special ability as educators, then perhaps it was appropriate to hold them to high standards. And perhaps the *Protagoras* and *Charmides* examples could be put down to Socrates’ penchant for appealing to *technai* whenever virtue is in question. But on the whole I think that there is a good case here for saying that, for Socrates, knowledge *is* *techne*. To be sure, Socrates does claim knowledge, or attribute it to others, in other contexts. And Socrates cannot be said to have distinguished craft knowledge from any other sort of knowledge. *Euthyphro* 6e, for example, seems to have propositional knowledge, acquaintance, and *techne* all jumbled together. But Socrates’ thought tends strongly in the direction of craft knowledge, and this is really no surprise, since it’s the only sort of knowledge of which he has any definite and developed conception.

Conclusion: Looking Forward {#conclusion-looking-forward .unnumbered} ===========================

The conception of knowledge I have described is easy enough to overlook. For us it’s an unfamiliar conception, developed in the context of unfamiliar debates. It’s a problematic conception of knowledge as well, since the treatment of virtue as *techne* creates difficulties made plain even in the dialogues themselves. The role of *techne* is further obscured by the room it makes for propositional knowledge, by the fact that Socrates’ conception of knowledge doesn’t entirely constrain his epistemological language, and by the fact that Socratic method is more prominent than Socratic theory.

It may also be thought that the identification of knowledge and *techne* is at any rate peculiar to Plato’s earlier dialogues. The *Meno* in particular is (rightly) seen as a “transitional” dialogue, in which more distinctively Platonic, as opposed to Socratic, epistemological themes are emerging. But in fact the *techne*-model is no less important in the *Republic* (for example) than in earlier dialogues. Socrates and Plato do grapple with difficulties presented by the model, or by the uses they put it to. New epistemological themes do emerge. But this is only to say that Plato eventually saw the need for a *modified* understanding of *techne*.

To vindicate that claim I would need to defend a detailed interpretation of the epistemology of the *Republic* and other dialogues. Here I will settle for illustrating one way in which Plato seems to have been motivated to rework the Socratic conception of *techne*.[^72]

We can start with the observation of Paul Woodruff (whose view of Socratic epistemology is in many ways similar to my own) that whereas learning is in the *Meno* said to be a matter of recollection, and thus involves no teaching, teachability was a mark of *techne*.[^73] He thinks that the *techne*-model for knowledge has therefore been abandoned by the time of the *Meno*.

Now that seems hasty. Is geometry no longer a *techne*? Does Socrates imagine a future for geometry without teachers? Or if teachers must now be known as ‘people who inspire recollection,’ have we abandoned the teachability criterion or only come to a new understanding of ‘teaching’?[^74] Or couldn’t Plato be toying with new ideas about how *technai* are acquired?[^75]

But there is a more substantial point. The proposal that learning is actually recollection is a response to the paradox of inquiry, posed by Meno in two parts at 80d: how will you search for something if you don’t know what it is? And how will you recognize it even if you find it? This paradox is a sophistical trick, as Socrates points out. And yet Plato makes use of the paradox to introduce recollection. And one reason for this is that the paradox is a genuine problem given the Socratic conception of knowledge.

Varieties of the paradox of inquiry already manifest themselves in earlier dialogues. At the start of the *Protagoras,* we find Socrates cautioning Hippocrates, who wishes to learn wisdom from Protagoras. As it happens, Hippocrates can’t say just what it is that Protagoras teaches—he suggests lamely that Protagoras will teach him “about what [Protagoras] knows” (312e). Socrates warns Hippocrates that a sophist is “a sort of merchant or pedlar of goods for the nourishment of the soul,” but that sophists don’t know whether their merchandise is of any value—and this is a danger because you can’t even take the sophist’s goods to an expert for inspection before you consume them. Hippocrates is in a predicament: he has a vague notion that wisdom is desirable thing, but no way to pursue it. He can’t safely go to a teacher unless he already possess the expertise he would learn.[^76]

The *Charmides* generalizes the point: only a craftsman will be able to tell whether another claimant to the same *techne* is or is not an impostor (170d–c). This is perhaps not a very serious problem, if a problem at all, when it comes to, say, weaving, but it might be a problem with something like medicine (to which Socrates appeals in the *Charmides*), at least in the ancient world, with its rival schools of medicine. If we add the point from the *Gorgias* that only a doctor can reliably distinguish genuine health from merely apparent health (464a), then we could again pose Meno’s question: supposing you think that health is a good thing, but don’t *know* health after the fashion of a doctor, how will you learn what it is?[^77]

But the really pressing case is *virtue*. Besides the general problem about inquiry, there is here the problem that there seem to be no authentic teachers at all—a point emphasized in the *Meno*.[^78] Socrates was perhaps prepared to accept that no moral *techne* was attainable, and to satisfy himself with going about on his divine mission, showing that anyone who claimed such a *techne* was a fraud (*Apology* 23b). But Plato, as the *Republic* shows, evidently had higher hopes. The difficulties gave him a reason to figure out a new view, and *not* a reason to stop being interested in expertise. This meant, among other things, an emphasis on the *a priori*, a corresponding shift in how the objects of *technai* are understood metaphysically (i.e. as Forms), and thus also a greater emphasis on *technai* like geometry which are more readily interpretable in those terms. But that’s the start of another story.

Appendix: Two Examples in the *Meno* {#appendix-two-examples-in-the-meno .unnumbered} ====================================

Again the *Meno* will make it clear that stability is a mark of knowledge in general, as opposed to just moral knowledge (98a).\

The earlier dialogues generally have the moral life particularly in view, but the *Meno* makes it clear that belief in general is changeable, by contrast with knowledge: on its own, whether true or false, belief is unstable and flighty, and Socrates likens beliefs to runaway slaves, or the unsecured statues of Daedelus (97c–98b).[^79]\

Twice above I appealed to a passage in the *Meno* which I take to indicate that features of beliefs and [*technai*] which I identified as holding in at least some specific cases are indeed features of belief and knowledge generally. In that passage, at 98a, it is said that beliefs become knowledge when tied down with “an account of the reason why.”[^80] This statement will naturally seem to treat primarily of atomic knowledge, to suggest that it is analyzable partly in terms of belief, and to concern itself with what is added to belief to get knowledge. And it is not obvious that there is anything to do with [techne] lurking here. So one could fairly wonder whether knowledge here in this passage has anything to do with the form of knowledge I’ve been discussing, and whether this passage doesn’t offer (or at least suggest) a different account of atomic knowledge than the one I just proposed.

If at 98a Plato is primarily concerned with an analysis of knowledge in terms of beliefs, that would mark a departure from the earlier centrality of [techne]. The passage does certainly describe a process whereby beliefs become knowledge. However, this process is rather opaque, since the phrase “an account of the reason why” (or “the cause”), is not terribly perspicuous. But, like most scholars, I take it to imply that knowledge requires some kind of understanding, or a capacity to explain why things are as they are. That seems to be borne out by Socrates identification of account giving with recollection—which is to say that he identifies giving an account with the sort of thing Meno’s slave had embarked on earlier in the dialogue.[^81] In that earlier conversation, Socrates and the slave together go through a demonstration to the effect that, taking one square, a second square of twice the area can be constructed by taking the diagonal of the first as a side of the second. But Socrates does *not* say that the slave then knows that this can be done. Rather he says that “these opinions have now just been stirred up like a dream, but if he were repeatedly asked these same questions in various ways, you know that in the end his knowledge about these things would be as accurate as anyone’s” (85c-d). Now this hardly tells us *exactly* what or how much more the slave would have to understand before he could be said to know any geometry, but it certainly suggests that Socrates is not interested just in knowledge of particular, isolated facts, but in facility with a *bodies* of knowledge, as in the earlier dialogues. A continued interest in [techne] would account for that.

That very tentative conclusion may be supported by the observation that although “account of the reason why” ([*aitias logismos*]) is not very perspicuous on its own, it is suggestive of the discussions of [techne] in the *Gorgias.* At 465a we have Socrates saying that “cookery”

> is not a craft, but a knack, because it has no rational account > (*logos*) by which it applies the things it applies, to say what they > are by nature, so that it cannot say what is the explanation (*aitia*) > of each thing . . . (Irwin trans.)

The point is reiterated at 501a with the example of medicine:

> I said that medicine has considered the nature of what it cares for > and the explanation (*aitia*) of what it does, and can give a rational > account (*logos*) of each of these things.

It could be that, in the *Meno*, Plato is not committed to the [techne] model in particular, but that he remains committed to the place of explanatory facility in knowledge generally. Still, this is at least a point of continuity, and at best it offers us (the readers, if not Meno) a way of interpreting an otherwise fairly opaque remark about knowledge. The kind of explanatory ability required here would then be the general capacity to explain the principles and applications of a body of knowledge defining a [techne], at least so far as relevant to the particular beliefs in question.

Having said that, we could certainly also say—and I do not believe Plato would be averse to saying—that once the slave becomes expert in geometry, he will know things which previously he only believed, by tying the old beliefs down with the explanations he now has at hand. So the beliefs at 98a might themselves become instances of atomic knowledge when their possessor can give the right sort of account. But if I am right, it would remain the case that, for beliefs to become knowledge, you would effectively have to add *knowledge* to them—that is, [techne] or some degree thereof.[^82] It would then remain the case that there is knowledge of the atomic sort only in the presence of [techne], in the way described above.

It is certainly true that, between the idea of recollection and the idea of somehow developing knowledge by way of belief, there is something new in the *Meno* in terms epistemology. And that demands explanation. I do not believe that the correct explanation reveals the abandonment of the [techne] model. But I defer this and related issues for my conclusion.\

Two prominent epistemological examples in the *Meno* don’t fit easily with the *techne*-model, so I wish to address them briefly. The first occurs at 71b, where Socrates says that he couldn’t know what qualities Meno possesses (say looks or riches) if he didn’t know who Meno was. Socrates uses the example to illustrate the point that he can’t say whether virtue can be taught since he doesn’t know what virtue is. The other is the ‘road to Larissa’ example [CITE]. This example is mean to illustrate the equal practical efficacy of knowledge and true belief.

Evidently neither Meno nor the road to Larissa is suitable material for a *techne*, just as there is no *techne* dealing with the poems of Homer in particular. Moreover the latter example has been cited to show that knowledge is “a state improved with regard to the very same things that the unimproved state [i.e. belief] is concerned with.”[^83] Whereas I have resisted (except in relation to atomic knowledge) the sort of ‘analysis of knowledge in terms of belief’ interpretation which this might suggest.

Now although neither example fits the *techne*-model, they don’t very well fit the epistemology of the *Meno* as a whole, either, as Dominic @scott2006psm points out regarding the road to Larissa case. This is because it’s not clear what knowing Meno or knowing the road to Larissa has to do with either recollection or explanation. And since it seems clear that the examples don’t really suit the epistemological outlook of *Meno*, it seems unnecessary to worry too much about them not suiting the *techne*-model.[^84] The fact that Plato is quite happy to use these particular examples speaks more to the fact that Plato does not distinguish forms of knowledge the way we might than to the direction of his epistemological thought.

One the other hand, even if knowledge of Meno or the road to Larissa is not systematic or explanatory in a way befitting a *techne*, there are affinities. Part of the point of the examples is presumably that knowing Meno or the road entails a degree of familiarity, and knowledge of the thing will entail, or be the source of, a great deal of *further* knowledge. As a doctor recognizes ailments by their symptoms, someone who knows Meno will be able to recognize him, too. Knowing medicine means knowing various specific techniques; knowing a road means knowing its twists and turns, and knowing Meno means knowing things *about* him. And we could expect knowledge of the road to Larissa to be reliable, in something like the way *techne* is. (If you’ve travelled the road to Larissa often, it’s unlikely someone could talk you into changing your view as to whether it goes through Chalcis.) So the examples share enough features (at least arguably) with the sort of systematic and explanatory knowledge Plato *is* primarily interested in that they can serve to make the points Plato wants to make.[^85]

What about the point that the road to Larissa example shows that knowledge and belief have a common object. It is less tempting to say here again that the examples are only imperfect illustrations of the sort of knowledge Plato is really concerned with, because other examples could be adduced, such as the case where Socrates says (at 85c–d) that the slave could come to know what he now only believes.[^86] But experience with the earlier dialogues offers us a fine response.[^87] Plato just isn’t fastidious about, if cognizant at all of, the difference between knowledge of the *techne* as a whole and knowledge about aspects of the *techne* or about applications of the *techne*. In the latter cases, knowledge may very well be constituted by belief, and that’s enough to account for the fact that the same objects are sometimes spoken of as objects of both belief and knowledge.

[^1]: @huemer2002ecr, p. 1.

[^2]: By “earlier dialogues,” I mean the *Apology, Charmides, Crito, Euthydemus, Euthyphro, Gorgias, Hippias Major, Hippias Minor, Ion, Laches, Lysis,* and *Protagoras*; I also draw on the *Meno* and *Republic* I. (But similar examples are also prominent in later dialogues.)

[^3]: *Gorgias* 491a; *Memorabilia* 1.2.

[^4]: @vlastos1991socrates [p. 41].

[^5]: @benson2000swm [11].

[^6]: pp. 211–212.

[^7]: @irwin1995pse [70].

[^8]: Isocrates’ *Against the Sophists* and the Hippocratic *On Ancient Medicine* discuss oratory and medicine respectively. @heinimann1961vpt treats the situation prior to Plato.

[^9]: 181e–184c. Neither Laches nor Nicias actually uses the word ‘*techne,*’ when speaking of fighting in armour; rather they refer to it as a (possible) subject (*mathema*), or as knowledge (*episteme*). Now ‘*episteme*’ is a frequent synonym for ‘*techne*’ in the early dialogues. And Socrates is treating ‘*mathema*’ as implying a *techne* at 185e, and when he begins speaking of *techne* back at 185a, Nicias assumes that the *techne* in question would be fighting in armour (185c).

[^10]: @schiefsky2005 [63–4] argues for dating *VM* to the late fifth century.

[^11]: A few scholars have recently taken more of an interest in the Socratic conception of *techne* in its own right, and as a matter of *epistemology* rather than just ethics—most notably Paul @woodruff1990pse and Angela @asmith1998. A useful discussion with more attention to the contemporary views about *techne* may be found in @reeve1989sita [37–45], though Reeve’s discussion generally gives the (in my view mistaken) impression that there was *a* going view of *techne,* albeit one which underwent some development.

[^12]: 449d. Trans. Zeyl.

[^13]: On systematicity see also @woodruff1990pse [71–2], @asmith1998 [135–6].

[^14]: cf. @kahn1996pas [xx].

[^15]: Arithmetic is a special case, representing an ideal of precision (*akribeia*)—see @roochnik1994cnp [@roochnik1996aaw] and @schiefsky2005 [13–18]. Indeed Plato will later say that every *techne* must participate in *arithmos* and *logistike* (*Republic* 522c; cf. *Philebus* 55e ff.). But exceptional or not, my point holds.

[^16]: @allen1994 provides an excellent survey of this topic.

[^17]: @roochnik1986 [19–20]. Cf. Isocrates (*Against the Sophists*) on writing out letters.

[^18]: For this sort of objection see e.g. *Protagoras* 319a–320b, *Laches* 185d–e, Isocrates *Against the Sophists* 14, *Dissoi Logoi* 6.5–6, *De Arte* 4; cf. @heinimann1961vpt [123–6].

[^19]: *Gorgias* 448c, *Euthydemus* 279ff., *De Arte* 4–7, *VM* 1, 12, *Places in Man* 41, 44, 46, Xenophon *Memorabilia* III.ix.14–15; cf. @vlastos1946eap [54–6], @heinimann1961vpt [108, 123–4], @allen1994.

[^20]: *De Arte* 5–6.

[^21]: At *Protagoras* 344c–d, Socrates says misfortune (*sumphora*) might incapacitate a craftsman but not an ordinary person (who has no *techne* to start with). Here misfortune interferes with *techne*, but by destroying it, not by preventing it from attaining its goals.

[^22]: “Wisdom makes men fortunate in every case [of *techne*], since I don’t suppose that she would ever make any sort of mistake but must necessarily do right and be lucky—otherwise she would no longer be wisdom.”

[^23]: cf. Allen pp. 85–6. This view, and the thesis that virtue suffices for happiness which it is meant to support, is open to the sorts of objections raised later against the Stoics by Alexander (*Supp. De Anima* 160.1 ff.). The argument in the *Euthydemus,* is, moreover, clearly fallacious. But the conclusion that virtue is sufficient for happiness is after all Socratic, and the case of *De Arte* shows that this position was a contemporary possibility.

[^24]: On stochastics *technai* see @allen1994 [88 ff.].

[^25]: 448c; cf. 462a and Aristotle *Metaphysics* 981a.

[^26]: 501a. A view of *techne* according to which it did just consist in experience was influential in later centuries. But quite likely Polus doesn’t himself mean to be defending a peculiar and disputable view of craft (@schiefsky2005 [346–8]). Aristotle mentions Polus’ statement as if it were an unobjectionable truism (*Metaphysics* 981a).

[^27]: cf. *VM* 20: doctors know “what the human being is in relation to foods and drinks, and what it is in relation to other practices, and what will be the effect of each thing on each individual.” @dodds1959pg and @irwin1979pg think the use of ‘*prospherein*’ at 465a suggests Plato had medicine in mind there too, which is perhaps borne out by 501a.

[^28]: 464a, cf. @irwin1979pg 500e–501a *ad loc*, and *Laches* 189e–190a.

[^29]: Cf. @moss2006pai on the relationship between pleasure and illusion in Plato.

[^30]: Cf. *Euthyphro* 6e, where piety is a *paradeigma* or model one may look to.

[^31]: Socrates is as happy with expressions of the form “know X” as “know what X is”—he thinks of knowledge as much in terms of acquaintance or perception as in terms of anything linguistic. See e.g. *Charmides* 159a, *Euthyphro* 6e, *Gorgias* 503e.

[^32]: See, for example, *Laches* 190a–c and *Gorgias* 503d–e. Indeed a phrase like “knowing X” can simply be used synecdochally to characterize a *techne* as a whole by reference to its proper object—thus medicine is the “knowledge of health,” or the “knowledge of health and disease” (e.g. *Charmides* 165c, *Gorgias* []).

[^33]: This sort of test is prominent in *Euthyphro,* *Laches,* *Charmides* and *Hippias Major*.

[^34]: p\. 149. Though some dialogues, e.g. *Charmides,* have the character more of a shared investigation—here it is an idea rather than a purported expert that is being tested.

[^35]: *Euthyphro* 16a, *Laches* 185b–187b, *Gorgias* 514a–515a.

[^36]: E.g. in the *Ion,* the first third of *Gorgias,* and the later parts of *Euthyphro* and *Laches*.

[^37]: Cf. @asmith1998 [153]: “too much emphasis has been placed upon the formal features of the Socratic elenchus, and not enough on the purpose and spirit of it.”

[^38]: The notion of a “craft analogy” is misleading, as it invites the question “how far does the analogy hold?” But Socrates treats *specific* *technai* as *analogues* of virtues, because he thinks that medicine, arithmetic, justice, etc., are *all equally* *technai*. Contrast Aristotle, who appeals to *techne* for a (limited) analogy with virtue, e.g. at *NE* 1103a32–b2.

[^39]: Some scholars, such as Terence Irwin, take the analogy to be exact. Others, including Gregory Vlastos and R. E. Allen, think that the analogy has definite limits. David @roochnik1996aaw [6] says that “Plato rejects techne as a model of moral knowledge,” and that Plato juxtaposes *techne* and virtue to show how *poor* a model *techne* provides.

[^40]: Perhaps Socrates objects to the use of the term ‘*techne*’? But surely Socrates thinks these Sophists don’t teach virtue at all, not just that it’s not a *techne* they’re teaching.

[^41]: @irwin1995pse [198–9] thinks that, for Socrates, *technai* are of instrumental value, virtue is *techne*, and so virtue is of instrumental value. Gregory Vlastos and George Klosko, for example, want to resist that implication, and rightly so.

[^42]: What about the case of draughts, say? (*Petteutike*—*Gorgias* 450d; see Dodds *ad loc.*: Plato is “probably thinking of a game of pure skill.”) @gosling1978pmt [100] draws attention to flute- and lyre-playing as well. But @roochnik1986 [187–8] goes too far in claiming that Socrates draws a distinction between productive and theoretical crafts at *Charmides* 165, so that “the value of theoretical knowledge is not instrumental: its worth derives solely from itself.” (cf. Smith, 137.)

[^43]: This is not ultimately a workable position. It identifies the good with knowledge, but to the question what it’s knowledge *of*, Socrates seems to want to answer that it’s knowledge of the good, which is unilluminating and violates the explicit stricture that a *techne* have some object independent of itself (*Charmides* 165c–166c, *Clitophon* 409a–d, *Euthydemus* 292a–e, *Republic* 505b–c).

[^44]: For example @allen1996pih [29].

[^45]: Though the situation in the *Republic* is more complicated in several ways.

[^46]: As observed just above, they say that *knowledge* can be overwhelmed, but I leave knowledge aside for now.

[^47]: Jessica @moss2006pai argues that pleasure is a trope for practical illusion in Plato.

[^48]: Like most scholars, I don’t believe Socrates really accepts hedonism. But the assumption of hedonism lets Socrates deploy the above argument against *akrasia* and allows for the development of a sort of toy-model for displaying Socrates’ views.

[^49]: In the *Gorgias,* too, Socrates emphasizes the vulnerability of the ignorant to the manipulation of charlatans who play on their appetites. Cf. also *Hippias Minor* 372d–e, *Euthyphro* 11b–c, *Meno* 97c–98b.

[^50]: Although Socrates promises a later consideration of just what this “craft and knowledge” is, he does not bring up the topic again—but perhaps he would intend to qualify the identification with arithmetic, or to say how pleasures and pains are measured?

[^51]: Thus Terence @penner1997ssk is right to insist that the “knowledge is strong” thesis is not implied by the denial of *akrasia.* The denial of *akrasia* is rather required to ensure we do as knowledge directs. Knowledge is strong because it ensures that you *think the right way*; *then* the denial of *akrasia* takes over. Cf. also @allen1960sp, pp 257-8 and n. 6.

[^52]: In a sense Socrates refutes the idea that knowledge is weak *twice*. If you think of knowledge in terms of knowing the right thing to do on a given occasion, then the refutation does consist in showing that *akrasia* is impossible. But if we think of knowledge in terms of *techne*, then the refutation is completed only later with the *techne* of measurement.

[^53]: cf. *Hippias Minor* 265-7.

[^54]: Strictly there is a three-way distinction between 1) the body of knowledge, 2) the possession of the *techne*, and 3) the beliefs resulting from *techne*.—Hugh @benson2000swm [205–11] also says we should distinguish between knowledge as a *dunamis* or power and knowledge as a state which is brought about by that power. But to call Socratic knowledge a *dunamis* is to under-describe it—knowledge is not just *dunamis* but specifically *techne*.

[^55]: *Meno* 71a–b, *Hippias Minor* 304d–e. Whether Socrates thinks that knowledge of what a thing is is necessary and/or sufficient for knowledge of its qualities or bearers, and how these theses should be understood, has attracted much controversy, mostly under the heading of “the priority of definition.” (A review of construals of, and of evidence for and against, these theses may be found in chs. six and seven of @benson2000swm.) I prefer to ask whether or not it is possible to know anything if you don’t possess a relevant *techne*.

[^56]: Richard Kraut suggests that epistemological standards rise over the course of the earlier dialogues—they are lower in the *Apology,* for example, and stricter in the *Meno* and the *Hippias Major* (@kraut1984sas [xx]. Irwin treats the positive knowledge claims as anomalous and supposes that what Socrates avows is not knowledge but merely true belief (@irwin1977pmt [xx]; cf. @irwin1995pse [28–9]).

[^57]: For instance @brickhouse1994pss [esp. p. 36] say that Socrates disavows systematically reliable knowledge of whole domains; but this is compatible with having knowledge of specific facts, to any degree of certainty or stability, within those domains. (I would say: Socrates has no craft—at least not of a moral sort—but this does not mean that he doesn’t know particular facts which would fall within the purview of some craft.) But this approach leads them to deny that, on the Socratic view, knowledge of definitions is necessary for knowledge of specific facts (45). But you could perfectly well still say exactly that, once you have distinguished different forms of knowledge.

[^58]: Benson p. 237. Though he speaks of understanding rather than *techne*.

[^59]: As @woodruff1990pse [77] points out.

[^60]: See Brickhouse and Smith pp. 39–41 for some possibilities (including these two).

[^61]: For the same reason, Benson is wrong to suggest that expressions of knowledge which fall outside his expertise sense are “loose” or “in the manner of the vulgar” (236, 238). He worries about cases where disavowals of definitional knowledge are juxtaposed closely with avowals of non-expert knowledge. (He appears—from p. 236 with n. 34—to be thinking of *Apology* 29a–b and 37b, and to a lesser extent of *Euthydemus* 296e–297a and *Hippias Minor* 304e.) He concludes that “we can either take these passages as evidence for another sense of knowledge that Socrates periodically makes use of—although not nearly so frequently as we have been led to suppose—or we can take them as misstatements made in the heat of the moment or in the manner of the vulgar. In either case the account of Socratic knowledge offered in this examination escapes unscathed” (238).

[^62]: This point will be missed if it is not realized that the impossibility of *akrasia* and the strength of knowledge are two totally different theses and that neither implies the other.

[^63]: Socrates is actually indifferent here between ‘*episteme*’ (352b), ‘*phronesis*’ (352c), ‘*sophia*’ (352d), and ‘*gignoskein*’ (352d).

[^64]: @lyons1972ssa, chapter 7. Lyons’ discussion concerns the Platonic corpus as a whole.

[^65]: Lyons pp. 179, 199 ff.

[^66]: Lyons pp. 160–1 ff. *Charmides* 159a may be an exception—Socrates observes that Charmides knows Greek, employing ‘*epistasthai*,’ but from the *Protagoras* I do not think Socrates would speak of a *techne* of Greek. (Lyons is also of the opinion that Socrates would not consider Greek a *techne*: see pp. 184–5, 221.)

[^67]: Lyons himself discusses a similar case in the *Ion* (at 540e) where ‘*gignoskein*’ is used in connection with ‘*techne*’ as part of an *argument* connecting good judgment in a particular field with an appropriate *techne*: pp. 188–198.

[^68]: trans. Woodruff with ‘craft’ substituted for his ‘profession.’

[^69]: Cf. @allen1989dpe [326].

[^70]: Though such *technai* as arithmetic and measurement show up plenty as well, and *take on* practical forms. We might also remember Aristotle’s somewhat disparaging remarks about history, on account of its dealing only with particular facts: *Poetics* 1451a36-b11.

[^71]: Interestingly, Isocrates, in “Against the Sophists,” wants to deny that oratory is a *techne* but *also* to claim that it’s worth teaching. In this he is more tolerant than Socrates, and yet it is clear that he is *struggling* to characterize this knowledge. Whereas contrast the various forms of knowledge Aristotle tabulates at the start of *NE* VI.3.

[^72]: Cf. @asmith1998 [157–161].

[^73]: @woodruff1990pse [81].

[^74]: Woodruff himself allows that the *Meno* is not consistent on the teachability question, and says that the suggestion that there might be knowledge without teachers “is resisted in the balance of the dialogue” (83). The teachability criterion is important as part of the *Meno’*s guiding hypothesis that if virtue is knowledge then it will be teachable.

[^75]: In fact a number of familiar features of *techne* reappear in the *Meno*. The completeness requirement seems to show up in Socrates’ insistence that the slave would have to go through many proofs repeatedly before he would have knowledge. The explanatory condition shows up at 98a, as does reliability.

[^76]: cf. @nehamas1999mps [10–12].

[^77]: This sort of question about expertise is reasonable. It’s no surprise that similar questions show up in contemporary discussions as well. See for instance @goldman2001experts.

[^78]: Unless we are to understand that Socrates himself is an exceptional case.

[^79]: cf. also *Hippias Minor* 372d–e, *Euthyphro* 11b–c, *Meno* 97c–98b.

[^80]: in Grube’s translation.

[^81]: At 82b or 84a. Or perhaps properly speaking recollection is what the slave might go on to do, as Nehamas says—@nehamas1999mps, p. 18.

[^82]: The notion of ‘explanation’ in Gail Fine’s proposal that knowledge in the *Meno* is justified (roughly: explained) true belief seems to me so expansive as to encourage just this conclusion—that (atomic) knowledge is true belief plus knowledge. [CITE?]

[^83]: Julia @annas1981ips, p. 192. Annas also mentions the flute example in *Republic* X and the the jury example in the *Theaetetus*. See also Gail @fine2004ktb, p. 43.

[^84]: Interestingly, Plato also uses the road example to illustrate the difference between knowledge and belief at *Republic* 506c, and there the example is deployed in an even more off-hand fashion, and is equally out of keeping with the general discussion.

[^85]: In fact the Meno example illustrates a point already familiar from earlier dialogues.

[^86]: Fine does indeed mention this example too.

[^87]: Annas and Fine are looking ahead to disputes about the nature of Plato’s middle-period metaphysics and epistemology. They want to resist too firm a distinction between the intelligible objects of knowledge on the one hand and the sensible objects of belief on the other.

